And then in honor and reverence for our lineage, we'll make a mandala offering and request for
the teachings, words and meanings to unfold in our minds and hearts. So this page 24, Fini.
The earth anointed with perfumed water and strewn with flowers, Mount Meru and the four
continents ornamented with sun and moon, by offering them visualized as a Buddha field,
may all sentient beings enjoy the pure land.
"Idam guru ratna mandala kam niryata yami," according to the wishes of sentient beings
and their capacities for the high and low, common and uncommon vehicles, please turn
the wheel of Dharma. So again and again, we have the great opportunity to meet, to study,
to contemplate, to practice these profound teachings which are nothing but revealing
our true nature. So how beautiful and just rejoicing and as usual, just rejoicing, relaxing,
reflecting a little upon our really wonderful, beautiful situation, generating vast bodhicitta
for all beings without exception, and keeping the pure view of the three vajra states and
the perfect combination of causes and conditions that are bringing us all together now.
So last week, we kind of, as far as thinking about things, we're focusing a little bit
more on, I think, looking at how we're structuring our practice. So always around what we call
the three frames, meaning good in the middle, good in the beginning, good in the middle,
good in the end, kind of a little bit touching on what that means. And then also talked about,
as far as good in the beginning, which we're carrying through to the end, is our view,
our really basic motivation. So also talked about these things, the three motivations,
and how they reflect, again, to the whole of our practice, which is the basic motivations
of all three yanas, which we practice as a unity in our practice lineage. So the motivations
of joy, appreciation, renunciation as one, the motivation of bodhicitta as two, and the
motivation of devotion and pure perception as three.
So I thought just again, we're all practicing together and kind of really going, just reviewing
for myself and for all of us, just some of the basic things that just help set good foundations
for our practice. And so one of those things is, of course, just as in reflecting on good
in the beginning, maybe I thought just to go over a little bit more, the breath purification,
a few people had asked about that. And it's definitely something really helpful, and it's
definitely part of our lineage. And so why do we do the breath purification? Essentially
to release the stale energies of our mind and our body, and let the natural fresh wisdom
winds ride. I think we all know the Buddha pointed out this thing called the three doors,
which make up one way of taking in the whole of our experience, and that is our body, our
speech, our mind, or another way of thinking of that is all forms, all movement, and all
spaciousness. So in the view of looking at just setting in for practice, one way of looking
within our body at those things is it's said in the teachings that the body is made out
of many, many channels. And through those channels, our wind energy is moving. And along
that wind moves our consciousness, the essence of our experience. And so the Buddha pointed
out how having good posture, letting the winds be flowing naturally, the energies in our
body flowing naturally, resting our mind in spaciousness and awareness is just good posture.
So with posture, of course, we have this very renowned, the seven point posture of Vairachana.
And the essence of that is, again, there's many instructions in this even in Rinpoche's,
many of Rinpoche's books, but we can go over just briefly. But essentially having our legs
be if we're sitting on the floor, having a good base. And often if you're sitting on
the floor on a cushion, if your hips are just a little bit above your knees, even when you're
in a chair, if your hips are a little bit above your knees, it helps your spine fall
into natural alignment. And so like if you're sitting cross legged or in lotus, half lotus,
or sitting, you know, on a cushion with your knees under you, it's all good. But having
a good base where you can relax and having your knees a little below your hips. So then
the next point is then having a well, you know, an erect spine. So again, that's not
ramrod straight, but relaxed, and our back does have a natural sway. So in the lower
back, so just feeling that or like a, you know, a stack of coins, feeling, you know,
the length of your spine that's supported by your legs and your pelvis. And then if
your chin is a little tuck that lets your spine continue up into your head and shoulders
are relaxed arm, the hands can be either in the equanimity mudra or resting on your knees.
And then they say like your arms and shoulders are like a vulture wings. But essentially
feeling that means your back is open, your chest is open, relaxed, nothing's pinched.
And just let it hang. And then our eyes are slightly open and can be looking gently down
in front of us. And then our tongue can be resting gently up behind our teeth on our top
roof of our mouth. And I find it helpful to really focus on also the center of gravity
of the body, which is if you count the way of feeling into that is about four fingers
below your navel. If you kind of gently rock, it's kind of where our center of gravity is.
Or if you've done any kind of martial arts or perhaps any massage work or anything, finding
that center is helpful. And including with our meditation posture. So that's our posture.
The idea is when our channels or our body is in good alignment, then our winds can travel
smoothly and be balanced. And when our winds are traveling smoothly and are balanced, then
our mind is peaceful and more naturally clear. And so then our three main channels that make
up the body, I'm sure we've all heard, there's many channels that go up and branch. The three
main channels are the central channel, which again, begins about four fingers below the
navel and goes straight up to the top of our head and comes out there. And then we have
a right channel that runs up along the right side of the central channel and kind of loops
around and said to exit by our right nostril. And our left channel again begins at the base
of the channels, about three or four fingers below the navel, comes up the left side around
and exits near the left nostril. So these are the three central channels of the body.
And of course, there's many, many, many channels where those channels intersect, or what's
called the chakras. But we're focusing, Buddha said, focusing on these three main channels.
That's the source of things. And especially, and clearing the stale winds we've accumulated
out of our misperception and actions from beginningless time, is what we'll do. And
so we're going to be focusing with good posture, focusing to then working on relaxing, letting
our winds come into freshness and vitality, feeling that. So first, we have what's called
the Vajra Fist. If we put our fingers about at the base of our ring finger, there's a
little pressure spot there and you can fold your fingers over your thumb and then pull
your these fingers back. Don't worry if you don't have it all. And then we're going to
put our hands down on the base of our torso, at the top of our legs. And we're going to
press down along our thighs. And when we reach our knees, we'll flip over. And then we're
going to pull back with our hands facing in and come up and out. And then let our hands
fall to our knees. And then we're going to breathe in, bring our hands back to this posture
and expel all the stale, karmic winds from our right nostril. And then we'll repeat the
same with the left nostril. And then we'll repeat the same with the central channel.
This time we'll keep our mouth open and can exhale a little there. And then as we do that,
when we're clearing the right channel, instead we're kind of focusing on expelling all the
stale karmic winds we've collected that are built up from all of our anger. When we're
expelling the left, the stale winds out of our left channel, we're concentrating, expelling
all the stale karmic winds we've accumulated from all of our grasping. And then when we're
expelling the karmic winds out of the central channel, we're expelling all the stale winds
associated with ignorance. And what are we breathing in? We're breathing in our freshness,
the wisdom winds, letting that natural vitality flow through our body and rise and clear and
kind of just flush out all of the stale energies. So basically, we're purifying our ignorance,
our attachment, our anger, bringing out our wisdom and compassion. And so we'll do that.
And then the visualization is you can visualize breathing in. When we're breathing out, we
can imagine the stale energies of the right coming out like just kind of putrid yellowish
energy and the channel filling with brilliant white energy. And then similarly, the left,
all the stale attachment winds, being body filling with wisdom winds and pushing out
all of the kind of in dark red, kind of putrid attachments. And then when we're expelling
wisdom winds flowing through and rising out, flushing out all the stale energy from our
ignorance, that's kind of expelling like dark blue smoke from the top. And then we're filled
with the brilliant sapphire light. And then we just rest with that. So there's a little
review of that. So let's do that as we continue with our practice.
So, let's do that. So, let's do that. So, let's do that. So, we're going to do this. So, we're
(heavy breathing)
And so we do that set three times
and then can just rest with that
and let things come in, relax our mind.
(heavy breathing)
So with our good posture, like they say,
mountain-like body, supported by the earth,
open to the sky, breathing naturally,
all of our senses, like a clear, still lake,
reflecting everything without any discrimination.
And space-like mind, these are the three good postures.
(heavy breathing)
And then it's very interesting, I was thinking,
we were talking about the three frames last week,
and/or the three noble ones.
And we didn't really talk a lot about the main practice,
but I just thought to remind ourselves
of one thing traditionally, these three noble ones,
one way of saying them very precisely.
And so if we just reflect on that a little bit
and relax with that is the first noble,
like we talked so many times, so essential,
because it's nothing but the whole
of what the Buddha's pointing out,
bodhicitta, joy, devotion, appreciation,
it's the first noble one.
Another way, traditionally, the main practice,
the second noble one is called non-conception.
Which, I mean, beautiful.
Resting with that.
Padra, body, speech, mind, learning to just drop,
learning just to drop all our mundane conceptions.
And our ego clinging, and accept things as they are.
And then, of course, during our main practice,
we have all these skillful means
where we are using conceptions,
but conceptions to bring us beyond conception.
Like Rinpoche says, like homeopathic medicine.
Or to get water out of the air, putting some water in.
So, accepting things as they are, not solely how they seem.
Use concepts to clear conceptions.
And they say, you know, abiding in our rigpa
is what cuts all the chain of delusion
that we've been wandering with since limitless time.
And so the main practice of non-conception,
we could also think, is really,
we're talking about meditation.
And of course, we have many skillful means of meditation.
And in this particular time,
we're doing this nundra practice.
But along with this,
we're trying to just carry these thoughts with us,
and absorb them into our minds and hearts,
and keeping that view of just that vast, spacious,
empty nature of things,
and the clarity aspect of our awareness,
and resting with that, coming again and again,
back to that.
So beautiful, so important, so vital.
And then of course, then the third frame
is dedication and aspiration.
But then in our main practice,
I'm not gonna talk long,
'cause we should start our practice.
But again, just reminding,
all the Buddha's teachings of meditation
come in two parts, the shamatha and vipassana.
So just checking in with ourselves.
If we're relating with that in any way, with our practice,
it's helpful for me, at least.
The essence of shamatha is calm, abiding,
and learning, developing our concentration,
and ability to not be distracted by appearances,
whether they're external or internal.
Instead of restlessly roaming and wandering,
developing the ability to relax and concentrate
and focus and be undistracted.
And then with that as a very, very, very good skill,
and ability to develop,
then the second aspect of all the Buddhist meditations
of vipassana, or supreme seeing,
are able to unfold more clearly and beautifully.
So the essence, in a brief, the essence of shamatha
is holding a focus, having an anchor.
The essence of vipassana is relaxing, releasing, opening.
And then as we're chanting, as we're practicing,
as we're visualizing,
we're actually practicing these two as a unity.
And so just relaxing with that,
bringing that into our own experience.
Meditation means literally becoming familiar.
We have to do that for ourselves.
So I think that's all I'm gonna say for today.
And we'll start our practice.
So just kind of using that
as something to remind ourselves with.
We'll continue now with our nundra practice.
And we'll just sit for a few moments and then we'll begin.
We'll say the seven line prayer,
and then we'll begin with the calling the lama from afar
in the nundra, which is on page
18.
(speaking in foreign language)
(singing in foreign language)
The 25 King and subjects.
(speaking in foreign language)
The 100 Tertons and others.
Llamas of Kama and tourmalineages to you, I pray.
In the past you were the (speaking in foreign language)
In the future you will be the Buddha Mopataye.
Now you are the regent of Padmasambhava,
the actual presence of Drup and Lotsawa.
(speaking in foreign language)
To you, I pray.
Happy with little content and rich in jewels
of the three trainings.
With loving compassion, seeing all beings as parents.
Through threefold realization, you made three doors,
three vatras, virtuous monk, (speaking in foreign language)
To you, I pray.
The supreme tradition of the glorious Buddha Padmasambhava,
which is the essential view of the early translation school.
You keep alive and spread by the light of wisdom.
Lord of Dharma, great Kempo, I pray at your lotus feet.
In the palace of the Oghman Dhammadhatu,
the essence of all the Buddhas of the three times,
the one who shows clearly the Dharmakaya of my own mind.
We pray to the honorable root guru,
glorious root teacher, precious one,
dwelling on the lotus seat on the crown of my head.
Hold me with your great kindness.
Bestow the accomplishments of body, speech, and mind.
Continue with calling the Lama from afar.
The essence, primordially unchanging,
the innate nature free from elaboration,
dwells as the youthful vase body,
the originally pure, profound clarity.
Dharmakaya Lama, Yashit Dorje, be aware of me.
Please grant the blessings
to attain great confidence in the view.
The nature unceasing, conjoined configuration
of luminous clarity dwells as the display
of the spontaneously present five certainties.
Sambhogakaya Lama, Ditchin Dorje, be aware of me.
Please grant the blessings
to perfect great ability in meditation.
The compassion without bias,
the primordial wisdom free from all limitations,
dwells as the essence
of all-pervading naked awareness emptiness.
Nirmanakaya Lama, Drodolinkpa, be aware of me.
Please grant the blessings
to accomplish great progress in action.
The primordial ground of one's own awareness
is unchanging and unmoving.
Whatever arises as the expression of Dharmakaya
is neither good nor bad.
Since awareness of nowness is actually the Buddha,
the completely free serene Lama
is revealed in one's innermost heart.
When this original mind is realized
as the very nature of the Lama,
there is no need for whining contrived prayers
made with grasping and attachment.
By letting go in the free natural flow
of uncontrived awareness, not holding whatever arises,
the blessings of self-liberation are obtained.
Through fabricated practice,
there is no time to achieve enlightenment.
This meditation produced through mental analysis
and intellect, it is deceiving enemy.
Now, conceptualization falls apart
with the abandon of a madman.
Let this life be spent in a state of uninhibited naked ease.
Whatever one does, joyful practitioner
of the great perfection in any company,
happy lineage holder of the lotus born,
protector without rival, great treasure revealing Lama,
teachings beyond compare, heart essence of the dikinis.
By having dispelled the heart's darkness,
great ignorance in its own place,
the undiminished sun of luminous clarity
shines continuously.
This good fortune is the kindness of the Lama,
the only father.
Unrepayable kindness, only remember the Lama.
[Silence]
We'll turn to the four thoughts.
Page 27.
Namo, lume, tenji, kompo, lama, chen,
da jo, dini, sin, tu, net, parka,
chece, mita, chi, wechu, chen, yin,
edi, klechi, judre, lo, wa, met,
kam su, kor, wa, duk, na, jam, su, nam,
dre, ne, da, klo, chula, chur, wa, shuk.
Namo, lama, infallible, constant protector,
be aware of me.
The freedoms and favorable conditions of this human birth
are extremely difficult to obtain.
Everything born is impermanent and bound to die.
The results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions
which are causes are inexorable.
The three realms of cyclic existence
have the nature of an ocean of suffering.
Remembering this, may my mind turn towards the Dharma.
Namo, lama, infallible, constant protector, be aware of me.
The freedoms and favorable conditions of this human birth
are extremely difficult to obtain.
Everything born is impermanent and bound to die.
The results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions
which are causes are inexorable.
The three realms of cyclic existence
have the nature of an ocean of suffering.
Remembering this, may my mind turn towards the Dharma.
Namo, lama, infallible, constant protector, be aware of me.
The freedoms and favorable conditions of this human birth
are extremely difficult to obtain.
Everything born is impermanent and bound to die.
The results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions
which are causes are inexorable.
The three realms of cyclic existence
have the nature of an ocean of suffering.
Remembering this, may my mind turn towards the Dharma.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
We'll move to the refuge with prostrations.
Again, we'll recite this a few times.
And then if you'd like to, where we get up here,
and we'll do this section of the practice together,
making prostrations to the shrine of Paldun Patnasamyaling.
So please join us if you'd like, as you will from there.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
Again, within the presence of Gurumpushe at the center of the refuge tree,
and all of its splendor embodiment of all three jewels, three roots,
in this pure land of Danakosha, with all the mother and
father of this life by our right and left, all sentient beings gathered before us.
In one voice with our body, speech, and mind, paying reverence to the,
all the objects of refuge, all those who've realized true nature
and all of its splendor and glory, compassion, wisdom, and
power embodied as Guru Padmasambhava, with all the Buddhas of the three times,
all Bodhisattvas, all the Dharma's texts resounding,
all the Dakini's Dharmapalas, and all the deities of the inner Tantras,
all the Harukas, everyone.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
Continue with the meditation.
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
From now until the attainment of the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment,
I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment,
I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment,
I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment,
I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
With that, we move into generating our bodhicitta
with Guru Padmasambhava
and all the objects of refuge as our witness,
making our bodhicitta aspiration and commitment.
With that, we move into generating our bodhicitta.
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment,
I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
From now until attaining the heart of enlightenment,
I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels.
From now until attaining the heart of refuge,
making our bodhicitta as our witness,
making our bodhicitta's individuality,
making our bodhicitta a witness,
making our bodhicitta a witness, making our bodhicitta a witness,